And we are moving to the next question, a very important question of our lecture, the question of managing turnover.
If we have been talking about what is turnover capital of an enterprise,
that is, we have defined it, indicating its importance for an enterprise,
now comes the moment of how to manage this capital, how to manage it correctly,
not to let it go to the dumps, so that the enterprise feels very good.
This is the second, but the most important question of our lecture.
The practice says that it is possible to choose three types of various policies of managing turnover capital.
Aggressive, conservative and moderate centrist policy.
Aggressive policy.
An enterprise that has an aggressive policy of managing its capital is called a fat cat.
Why? What is aggressive policy?
Aggressive policy implies no restrictions on the growth of current assets.
No restrictions. Current assets grow, increase, the enterprise feels amazing.
All its resources are huge, it is aimed at increasing its assets.
The reserves of this enterprise are gigantic.
It never has a failure, it has no problems with deliveries.
It has no failures, it has all the reserves, any reserves.
Fat cat.
The other side of the coin.
Some of the reserves are dead reserves, unnecessary reserves.
Taking all the risks into account, the enterprise freezes a huge amount of its assets in reserves.
Naturally, the economic profitability of these assets is lower.
But the enterprise has no problems.
As they say, if it doesn't hurt, the head will go.
No problems with failures in the production, supply and implementation process.
Aggressive policy of managing capital is typical of passive policy.
A sign of this policy is a significant pre-emphasis on short-term loan.
The enterprise takes only short-term loans, uses them actively and returns them quickly.
If short-term loans prevail among all passives, it means that the enterprise is aggressive.
What does it give to the enterprise? Why does the enterprise use aggressive policy?
A short-term loan has its pros and cons.
The pro of a short-term loan is a lower interest rate.
A short-term loan in a bank can be charged at a lower rate than a long-term loan.
The second pro of short-term loans is that there are forms of loans
that can be obtained for a period of a month without a deposit.
But this form of loans has its cons.
A short-term loan must be returned very quickly.
Therefore, only a short-term loan can be used by an enterprise
that quickly returns its profits to the enterprise.
Only for such enterprises with a short cycle,
such a policy of managing capital is possible and real.
If an enterprise has a longer production cycle, it cannot use this policy.
If an enterprise takes a short-term loan and invests it in the production process,
it has no means to return it.
At the same time, the use of such a policy gives the enterprise
an additional higher level of financial leverage.
Note that if the enterprise has a low interest rate,
the profitability is high.
If the enterprise has a high interest rate and profitability,
the enterprise has a higher level of financial leverage
and can earn a higher margin.
Such a policy is chosen by large enterprises,
which have a lot of money.
And most importantly, such a policy is chosen by enterprises
that cannot be allowed to fail.
They cannot lose their partners, they cannot stop production.
But imagine a metallurgical plant.
What does it mean to have a shortage of supplies
and, as a result, to stop the Martenovskaya domino oven?
If you stop the domino oven,
a goat is formed there, which must be removed from there with great difficulty.
This is a loss of time, money, and so on.
There is a production that cannot be stopped in any case.
There must be a surplus of supplies,
it must be insured in all cases.
Here is the policy of a fat cat.
There is a diametrically opposite policy of asset management.
It is a conservative policy.
It is a conservative policy,
because it is used only by enterprises
that have very little turnover.
So little that they tremble for every penny.
And they are forced to spend their money
only on the most necessary assets.
They calculate up to every penny,
they spend it very rationally.
Yes, because of this, their profitability is very high.
They have a very rational use of money.
But the opposite side, because they have very few assets,
they can have a shortage.
Therefore, a conservative policy can be used
when you are forced from poverty,
when you simply do not have enough money,
and when every penny is on the account,
or when the business is highly determined.
If you have clearly scheduled needs in supplies
and in the implementation of production,
and your uncertainty is reduced to zero or its minimum value,
then the amount of supplies can be reduced to the minimum value.
You know exactly when and how much you need,
and this is determined by the course of the production process.
Therefore, in these two cases, a conservative policy is used.
A sign of a conservative policy is a low interest rate
of a short-term loan in the total amount of passives.
That is, you pay very little to the bank,
you take a loan.
While the sign of a fat cat policy,
an aggressive policy,
is a high interest rate of short-term loans.
In a conservative policy,
all assets are financed by permanent passives,
their own funds, long-term loans and loans.
Because short-term loans are used very little.
And, accordingly, the effect of the financial lever is quite low.
And the third group of businessmen,
enterprises that use politics,
is moderate politics or centrists.
They do not belong to fat cats or do not work poorly.
They do not have excess assets
or are not in a state
when there are no excess assets.
They are in the middle.
This is an optimal value
that avoids shortcomings that are inherent in the extreme.
But at the same time,
it does not give the advantages that these extremes have.
Those who pursue a centrist policy,
their risk of unpaid ability is at a certain average value.
It is acceptable and convenient.
No one makes any claims to them.
But at the same time,
they do not have excess money,
thanks to which these risks can be reduced to zero.
A sign of moderate politics of centrists
is the absence or very low interest rate of short-term loans
in the total amount of passives.
There are practically no short-term loans.
If we combine all the signs we listed in one table,
we will get a matrix of the choice of politics,
operative management of current assets and passives.
Please look at the slide that is in front of you.
You see the matrix
in which the policy of management of current assets
is divided into three types.
We have just discussed three types.
Aggressive, moderate and conservative.
The intersection of these types of management
gives us the financial policy
that is applied at the enterprise.
You can see from this slide
that aggressive policy in relation to passives
is not combined with conservative policy in relation to assets.
It is impossible,
there is no such enterprise
that could use these two policies.
The aggressive policy of assets,
of fat cats,
is not combined with conservative policy of passives.
All other combinations are possible.
The combination of two aggressive policies
gives us an aggressive state of the enterprise.
The enterprise uses only short-term loans
and with the help of these loans
it buys huge amounts of stock.
It has no problems.
It is an aggressive policy.
The opposite is the case with the conservative policy
of assets and passives.
The enterprise takes care of every penny
and looks at its expenses very scrupulously.
At the same time,
it does not use short-term loans,
but only works with long-term loans.
This is called the conservative policy
of using assets and passives.
All other combinations
give us a moderate policy.
A moderate policy of assets and passives.
If you ask me what is the best form of policy
for the enterprise,
I will tell you that there is no such form
that would be ideal,
that you should strive for.
The form is determined by the state
of the enterprise.
If the enterprise has a huge amount of money,
it is more convenient for it to have an aggressive policy.
Of course, such an enterprise
is able to take care of its reputation
in the market.
It cannot afford any failures.
Therefore, it leads an aggressive policy.
The enterprise is not able to pay
for its reliability in the market.
On the contrary,
when the enterprise has no money,
it has no other policy but the conservative one.
Life itself makes it work
in the conditions of the conservative policy.
If the enterprise is in a normal state,
it leads a moderate policy.
It uses short-term money,
but it does not spend it left and right.
It rationally invests it in the reserves.
There is no surplus in these reserves.
This is how the vast majority of enterprises work.
If you want to work as a vast majority of enterprises,
which is a normal state for a business,
you should choose a moderate policy of cooperative management
with the current assets and passives.
Later we will talk about how the management
of the elements of the turnover assets happens.
One of the most important elements of the turnover assets,
as we have discussed today, is the reserves.
The reserves are the assets that are intended
for the enterprise to function normally
within its business cycle.
In order to ensure a normal,
rhythmic state of the enterprise.
As you remember, the enterprise's production cycle
consists of three parts.
The first part is the raw materials purchase.
There are the production processes.
There is the unfinished production.
Some of the raw materials are in the form of unfinished production.
There is the finished product in the warehouse,
which is not yet implemented.
Some of the raw materials are in this form.
Each of these forms is needed by the enterprise.
It should only choose the optimal combination
and distribute its reserves between these forms.
And depending on how it distributes these reserves,
the financial stability of this enterprise depends.
We have already discussed today that the reserves
are influenced not only by the production structure,
but also by the seasonality.
The reserves are also influenced by the purpose of the production.
It happens that the product needs to be produced
at a strictly defined date,
and accordingly, the reserves need to be prepared
for this date.
We have already said that the reserves should be
distributed in a way that is not
in the way of the production process.
What will the enterprise get?
What negative aspects will be characteristic for the enterprise?
We should know what is negative and what is not.
This should be the evidence of the inoptimal
distribution of the reserves.
What is the evidence?
First of all, if the quantity of reserves increases,
it should tell us about the increase in the production volume.
The larger the production volume,
the larger the quantity of reserves.
To produce more products, you need to buy more raw materials,
to have more products in incomplete production,
so the quantity of reserves is always compared
with the quantity of production volume.
If the quantity of reserves is the same,
the quantity of production volume does not play a negative role.
If the volume of production increases by two times,
the quantity of reserves could also increase by two times.
This is a normal state of operation of the enterprise.
But if the quantity of reserves increases by two times,
and the volume of production increases by 10%,
this is not a normal state.
We need to look closely at why this happened.
Of course, if there was a lack of reserves before,
this can indicate the transition to the optimal mode.
But if before that we had an optimal reserve mode,
then the increase of reserves is faster than the increase of production volume,
which indicates that there is an abnormal increase in the reserves,
and, accordingly, their freezing.
The increase in the quantity of reserves is also used by the business
to protect against inflation.
If inflation grows at a very high rate,
the business is protected from it.
We, as individuals,
at high rates of inflation were protected
by the fact that we were transferring money from a weak currency
to a stronger currency, for example, dollars or euros,
and those that had less inflation
were able to save their money.
Legal entities do not have the opportunity
to transfer money from one currency to another,
so they use another form of saving money in the condition of inflation.
They increase their reserves.
The thing is that the reserves that have been acquired
have not grown in price.
They have been bought, and they are available,
and can be used at any time.
But after some time,
those same reserves will cost more.
Therefore, in the condition of inflation,
free money was used to buy reserves.
They are still needed, they will still be used in production.
It is more profitable to store them in reserves than to depreciate them.
Another thing is that here, again,
you can store money in the form of reserves,
you can store it in another form, for example, in a bank deposit.
You can only compare what is economically more profitable
to invest in a bank at a percentage,
or to protect from inflation.
The mechanism that will give more benefit is more profitable to use.
Usually,
it is more profitable to protect from inflation
than to use it as a deposit.
Therefore, enterprises increase the volume of reserves,
preferring to increase the investment of money in deposits.
The ineffectiveness of the use of reserves
is also caused by excessive freezing of reserves
in the form of unfulfilled production
or in the form of reserves in the raw material warehouse.
If there is an excessive amount of reserves,
it leads to the fact that enterprises
are not effectively using their money.
Therefore, excessive increase of reserves is harmful.
When we have a shortage of reserves at the enterprise,
it is also not good.
If the enterprise is short of reserves,
then the enterprise starts to break down in production,
the rhythm of production is disrupted.
This is also bad, because the enterprise is in a frenzy,
it stops.
There are no steering wheels,
and the whole auto-vase has stopped.
The small detail, from which the entire conveyor of the auto-vase has stopped.
Everything is needed.
The enterprise should work rhythmically, without interruptions.
Therefore, there should be a sufficient amount of reserves.
Another thing is that the shortage of reserves
is overloaded.
And it starts to produce less than it is able to produce.
The volume of the enterprise's income
decreases.
The enterprise receives less income than it can produce.
If the enterprise does not work
with its maximum capacity,
its production cost increases.
The fact is that the enterprise has all the main means
that are amortized.
If the enterprise reduces the volume of production,
then more and more funds are needed
to amortize the production.
Remember, we once said that it is much more profitable
to produce more pencils than one pencil.
Because one pencil amortizes the entire enterprise.
And the cost of a pencil is so huge
that it is like gold.
And when a lot of pencils are produced,
then the cost of a pencil is small.
Because all amortization is due to a huge amount of produced products.
And it is not profitable for the enterprise to reduce the volume of produced products.
Because then the cost of production increases.
And the cost of production increases.
And the enterprise receives less income than it can produce.
All this together leads to a deterioration of the financial state of the enterprise.
And the task of every financial director
is not to allow the deterioration of the financial situation of the enterprise.
Therefore, the amount of reserves should be optimal.
And how to calculate the amount of reserves needed for the enterprise?
Here is the formula in front of you.
Look carefully at the screen
and you will see how the amount of funds
allocated to the reserves is calculated.
You see that this amount is equal to the production
of the average daily volume of reserves
by the norm of the reserve storage.
This is the amount of funds that should be spent on reserves
if you were not credited.
Your partners in the market
did not provide you with a return,
or rather a timeout of reserves
in the form of a commercial loan.
But since we live in a real market
where it is customary to provide commercial reserves in the term of the loan,
we must subtract the amount of reserves needed
from the amount of reserves needed
for a certain period of time.
Therefore, you see in this formula
the amount of funds allocated
for the financial volume of the reserve.
The amount of funds allocated
is calculated according to the type of reserves
that are required.
And the amount of funds needed
is determined by the amount of funds
that are allocated.
If we bring a huge amount of reserves,
our transport costs become minimal.
Of course, we loaded a huge amount of transport funds
and delivered a large amount of reserves.
But the more the amount of reserves that we bring,
the more the amount of funds that we bring
the more the stock is needed for its storage.
And by saving on transport costs,
we get huge costs for storage.
We need to build a huge warehouse,
we need a lot of workers to serve it,
we need to make additional costs for storage.
Thus, we see that huge reserves
are needed for storage.
But there is a reverse situation.
If we want to have minimal costs for storage,
not to have a warehouse at all,
or to have a small warehouse
with small costs for its service,
then we should often bring our reserves and update them.
And despite the fact that the costs for storage
will be small, the costs for transportation will be large.
For an enterprise, the cost is the amount of costs
for both storage and transportation.
And the enterprise should minimize this amount.
This task is solved mathematically
and the amount of reserves is obtained
when the total costs are minimal.
The Wilson model is presented
in the form of a formula on the slide.
The optimal size of the batch
that should be brought
to minimize the total costs
is determined in this way.
The estimated amount of goods purchased
and the cost of goods delivered
is calculated in this way.
The estimated amount of goods delivered
is the optimal size of the batch.
If an enterprise knows about this,
and buys reserves with such amounts,
then it will be able to minimize the costs.
Let's take an example
that would reinforce our theoretical idea
about buying raw materials.
Let's say that we have a yearly demand for raw materials
in the amount of 1 million rubles.
The current costs for delivery are 12 thousand rubles,
but the optimal size of the batch is 12 thousand rubles.
We substitute the Wilson formula
and find that the optimal size
of raw materials should be delivered
to 63 thousand rubles.
Since we need a yearly demand of 1 million rubles,
we can calculate how many times a year
we should deliver raw materials.
1 million divided by 63 thousand is 16 times.
That is, we should deliver raw materials
not more, but not less.
Because more times and less times
will increase our costs for raw materials.
And with 16 times we will have the lowest costs.
In other words, every 22 days
we should receive a new batch of raw materials.
At the same time, the costs for service will be minimal.
This is how this optimization task is solved.
And every enterprise that deals with the production process
is able to calculate how often
and what batch of reserves it needs to update
in order to have the lowest costs for reserves.
The next issue we will discuss
is the issue of managing the debit debt.
We have learned to manage reserves,
we still have to learn to manage the debit debt.
The debit debt is owed to your enterprise,
but it has not been received yet.
These are the funds that you have given to other enterprises
and they use these funds, but they must be returned to you.
The other thing is when and under what conditions.
We have already talked about the fact
that the debit debt is a sign of the market.
If an enterprise does not transfer
a part of the finished product
in the form of a credit to another enterprise,
the enterprise will forget about it
and the consumers will transfer it to competitors
who provide the credit.
Therefore, since we are within the market,
the debit debt is a sign of the market.
It is a sign that we are within the market.
Therefore, it exists in all enterprises
that are connected with production and trade.
The other thing is that the debit debt
must be of the optimal size.
Again, the excessive size of the debit debt
is a negative thing.
We must understand that when an enterprise
provides a debit debt,
it distracts its own funds and transfers them
to other enterprises and cannot use them
in its own business.
On the other hand, it is forced to do so
because the size of the debit debt
is influenced by several factors.
The first one is the customer's reliability.
Before providing a credit to a customer,
any enterprise evaluates the reliability
of the customer as a business partner.
If the customer is reliable and has bought
your product and paid for it in time,
then such an enterprise can be provided
with a credit and a debit debt.
Since you are sure that you will be paid
the money amount as it should be
according to the contract in a strictly
negotiated time, the business process
is not over.
If you do not know the business partner,
if he is new to the market,
if he is not familiar with the enterprise
and if he is likely to work well
in the market, you can refuse to provide
a credit to this business partner.
In order to do so, you will be asked
to pay a credit.
In this case, you will do the right thing
from the business point of view
because all your competitors will do the same
with this business partner.
You will not lose here.
In the early 90s, when capitalism
was just emerging in our country
and our enterprises were buying
foreign goods for import and bringing
them to the country to implement it here,
all our trade organizations
were talking about the unfair attitude
of the trade companies.
Foreign companies were provided
with credit, but our companies were not.
Our enterprises were forced to buy
on prepayment.
Why? Because we were not reliable
trade partners.
No one knew us, no one trusted us,
no one believed in us.
But the years decide.
Those enterprises that for many years
were reliable partners,
started to receive credit.
And today, Russian enterprises,
just like inside the country,
provide our customers with credit.
Therefore, the customer's assessment
of their reliability is the most important
point in the decision of whether to provide
a credit or not.
But one thing is to provide a credit,
not to let the business go to the dump.
Therefore, all the enterprises,
although they trust their partners,
but they strictly monitor the debt.
At every enterprise that provides
a credit, there are employees
who are responsible for the state
of the debt.
They work with their partners,
ask them to pay the debt back
on time.
Therefore, the control of the debt
is the most important part of every enterprise.
If you don't remind your partner
about the debt, he can forget about it.
The thing is that our enterprises
don't always use the sanctions
when providing the credit.
And if the sanctions are not used
for the credit, or even worse,
if they are written in the contract
and are not required,
then enterprises forget
that they should pay the debt on time.
And it can take a long time.
And the long term of the debt
without the reward
leads to the loss of the enterprise.
And the enterprise has to pay
a lot of money for the debt.
And the money doesn't work,
it doesn't bring income to the enterprise.
And the most important thing is
that the debt is a business mechanism.
It is a necessary element
of the process.
The enterprise's debt should be
in the optimal state.
And there should be a certain amount.
If the enterprise has a sharp increase
or decrease in the debt,
it indicates a certain process.
What is the evidence of the sharp increase
of the enterprise's debt?
The first thing that should be noticed
is that we have to compare the enterprise's debt
with the production volume.
If the volume of the enterprise's debt
and the volume of the enterprise's debt
is the same,
it means that we have just given the product
to the partners who buy it.
And nothing bad happened.
If the enterprise's debt
grows faster than the volume of the enterprise's debt,
it means that the enterprise's debt
is not being used.
And if the volume of the enterprise's debt
is faster than the volume of the enterprise's debt,
it means that the enterprise's debt
is not being used.
It means that the enterprise's debt
And it is not being used.
But the enterprise's debt is not growing
only because the volume of the enterprise's debt is increasing.
Sometimes the enterprise's debt is overdue
when the enterprise you gave the product
does not pay back its debt.
And sometimes the enterprise is not able to pay back.
And it can be even about bankruptcy
of some of the buyers.
It is a disturbing signal.
You should know the financial condition of your partners.
You should know how their business is going.
So it is better not to let such a situation happen.
And it is a very extreme case
when the enterprise's debt is used
to wash away the money.
When the partners are given the money
not for the credit,
but to use it for another purpose.
And it is a very extreme case.
The sign of such a mechanism
of using the money
is that the enterprise's debt
is not being used for the payment.
It is not being used.
It is forever.
And in three years it can be used for the payment.
If the enterprise has such a debt
it is a reason for the state authorities
and the Tax Administration
to pay attention to the state of such a debt.
And the most important reason
is that the owners of the enterprise
should pay attention
to how their employees use the money.
If the owner of the enterprise
is not aware of the fact
that the employees use the money
it is a reason to make
the appropriate organizational conclusions.
We are still talking about
the increase of the enterprise's debt.
And what happens if the enterprise's debt
is reduced?
If the reduction of the enterprise's debt
is connected with the reduction
of the production load
it is a normal phenomenon
that the enterprise's debt is reduced.
There is nothing wrong with it.
But on the other hand
the reduction of production load
is a sign of the reduction of the enterprise's business activity.
This is a negative moment.
The reduction of the enterprise's debt
is a consequence of this.
It cannot be seen as a negative phenomenon.
On the other hand
the reduction of the enterprise's debt
can be seen as a positive phenomenon
if it is connected with the reduction of the period of its reduction.
The total amount of the enterprise's debt
is the sum of all the money.
Therefore, if the period of the debt reduction is reduced
it is a positive phenomenon.
It will be returned faster.
And for the enterprise it is a positive phenomenon.
Thus, it is impossible to judge
whether the increase or reduction of the enterprise's debt
is a positive phenomenon.
The only negative moment is
the change of the enterprise's debt.
The change of the debt is a result of the analysis
of the change of the enterprise's debt.
The only way to judge it is to analyze
whether it is a positive or a negative phenomenon.
The enterprise's debt can be distinguished
between a normal and a temporary one.
The normal one is a result of the business process.
The business demands a 30-day extension.
Therefore, the 30-day enterprise's debt is normal.
But if during the period of the contract
the enterprise's debt is not returned
then it becomes a temporary debt.
It is kept longer than the contract.
The temporary debt is harmful for the enterprise.
The enterprise has lost the money
it needs for normal functioning.
The enterprise starts to work actively
to return the temporary debt.
Thus, when the enterprise is organized
by the service that is engaged in the temporary debt
this service performs a double work.
It tracks the normal debt
and does an active work to return the temporary debt.
The temporary debt can be managed.
The service that is created for this purpose
is engaged in this process.
How is it done?
There are two phenomena in the management of the temporary debt.
The first one is the comparison of the additional profit
with the costs of changing the policy.
What does it mean?
The enterprise could use a double work.
On the one hand, it could give the debt in the form of a credit
and on the other hand, it could deposit it in the bank.
Comparing these two processes
we can see which one is more profitable for the enterprise.
And in a certain direction
we can send the money.
If the work with the banks is not profitable
the enterprise uses the debt.
If the deposit in the bank is more profitable
then the money is sent in the form of the debt
in the form of the credit for the enterprise.
This is one direction.
The second direction is related to the comparison
and optimization of the extended term of the debt and the credit.
The fact is that we provide the debt
and the credit.
And, accordingly,
comparing these two processes
we should strive
to make the amount
that we receive
more or less than the amount
that we give to our partners.
In order to realize the production
the enterprise actively uses
the debt.
And with the help of the debt
the enterprise is able to sell the goods.
Why is it done?
The discount is needed to activate the sale process.
If the enterprise receives a discount
depending on the volume of the purchase
the more the volume of the purchase
the more discount the partner receives.
Thus, discounts are used
to increase the volume of the production.
The use of discounts leads to the increase
of the volume of the production and the increase of the debt.
With the help of discounts
the debt can be regulated.
We want to increase the debt
and we want to use it as a tool.
Thus, we should look at the discounts.
Using the discount mechanism
we can actively use the debt mechanism.
Why else can we use the discount process?
The fact is that sometimes
the enterprise lacks the money.
The enterprise tries to replenish the money
but it's not always fast.
For example, it's not always easy
to get the money in the bank.
Even a short-term loan takes time.
And the money needs to be fast.
So, discounts are used.
The discount mechanism is used
to increase the volume of the production
and to get additional money for the enterprise.
Discounts can also be used
instead of fines.
In fact, usually, the contract
uses a combination of the loan
and the debt.
But, as practice has shown,
it's not the most effective way
to manage the debt.
There is a more effective way.
The enterprise gets an additional discount
if it returns the money
before the contract expires.
So, the contract says
that the loan will be granted for 30 days.
If the money is not returned in 30 days,
there will be fines of the same amount.
And there is an additional condition.
If the enterprise returns the money
before the contract expires,
it will get a discount on the product
it purchased.
This is the most effective way
to pay off the debt.
Because the enterprise
wants to reduce the costs
of the company's financial policy
and to pay off the debt in advance.
And to get additional discounts
on the product it has already purchased.
In this case, the enterprise
that provides such a discount is profitable.
But, again, we should compare
the benefits of the discount
with the benefits of the loan.
Should the enterprise use the money
to get additional profit
or leave it as a loan
to the consumer?
If the enterprise's own consumption
is more effective than the interest
you will have to pay
for the money you will get in advance.
For example, if your business's profitability
is 40% per month,
and you will get a 1% discount
for the money you will get in half a month,
you will get a 1% discount.
Because you will create more profit
in your own business
than if you leave the money
with the enterprise.
And the enterprise that takes the loan
can have a month's discount
and you will pay it in advance.
You just give it an additional opportunity.
And then the enterprise decides
what is more profitable for it.
So, practice has shown that using
such a mechanism in business
is the most effective way
to get a discount.
So, take this information
and try to use this mechanism
in your contracts.
I think you will find it very useful.
Besides the discounts I suggest you use,
you can use other mechanisms
that are not actively used.
This is a mechanism of imposing fines
for the delay of payment.
The fine should be such
that it is more profitable to return it
than to pay the fine.
Many enterprises do not write down
the sanctions,
because they forget
that they have to return the loan.
And this is a very long process.
There are many cases
when the loan was withdrawn
for a month.
And there were no sanctions.
The most friendly relations
were returned years later.
Of course, there were no additional
compensations in the absence of sanctions.
At least the amount that was presented
as a commodity loan was returned.
But this is not profitable
for the enterprise.
Because money withdrawn
does not bring any additional income
to the company.
The presence of a fine
will protect you
from the sanctions.
But if you do not want to quarrel,
but want to live in friendly relations,
then you can use another way
to speed up the return of the loan.
This is to make a deal
with Vexel for a percentage of the payment.
What does this mean?
You provide a commodity loan
and get Vexel in exchange.
It is written that you can
provide Vexel to the lender
and get the amount you owe.
This way you have secured yourself.
You have received the loan and you are paid.
Instead of seeking a return
of the loan, you just provide Vexel
and get the payment.
This is also a very effective mechanism.
The next mechanism is used
when you do not know the business partner
and do not give the commodity you produced.
You just do not give it to the lender
but sell it on prepayment.
Remember, I already told you today
that in the early 90s all foreign companies
provided commodities for Russian businessmen.
This was the norm of business behavior.
You do not know the business partner
and no one knows him.
First you have to earn a reputation.
With the help of prepayment
a businessman earns his reputation.
And in the 10th time
your trust in him grows.
You do not have to give prepayment.
The last mechanism
that can be used to speed up the return
of the debit debt is the factoring mechanism.
I have already mentioned that factoring
is a modern, new, growing mechanism
for the return of all kinds of debts
that are in front of the company.
For example, the debt of the debitor.
You provide the commodity in the form of a credit
and sign a triple contract
where the third party is the factoring company
and you provide all the documents
about the return of the commodity.
The debt is not paid in full,
usually it is paid in 90%.
This way the mechanism of factoring
has an economic basis
and does not contain the mechanism
of pumping money from the bank.
The economic mechanism was not a lie.
Factoring companies are developing rapidly.
It is very profitable to use factoring business
for the enterprises that are engaged in production.
Moreover, factoring companies
not only provide money,
they also perform other additional functions.
For example, they can track the return
of the debt of the debitor.
Moreover, factoring companies
ensure the non-return of the debt of the debitor.
If an ungrateful partner
does not return the debt of the debitor,
then the factoring company pays for it.
And then it interacts with the debitor
to return the money.
When working with unknown business partners,
this mechanism is also effective.
When you are insured and fully guaranteed
that your money will return to you
in integrity and safety.
But it should be emphasized
that the return of the debt of the debitor
and the factoring money are only profitable
in one case.
If the profitability of the business
is higher than the costs of this scheme,
if the business is low-profitable,
then there is no point in resorting
to loans in a bank.
You should work only with your own money.
And it is even better if your business
is high-profitable.
If your business is high-profitable,
everyone works with you with pleasure.
Banks, factoring companies,
and the next question we will consider
is the management of money assets.
The fact is that
a part of the assets of any enterprise
is in the form of money.
The money is in the account.
On the one hand, these money
should be used to cover the costs
of the enterprise.
For this, you need money
to cover such costs every day.
On the other hand,
in the condition of inflation,
keeping an excessively large amount
of money in the account is not profitable
for the business.
If there was no inflation,
then it would be a completely different story.
But if there is inflation,
it devalues money every day.
It is like a clock counting seconds.
If you have a lot of money in the account,
you lose a lot of money every second.
But if there is not enough money,
you cannot cover your current needs.
This leads to a failure of production.
Imagine that you cannot buy supplies of raw materials.
Yes, you saved money, but you did not lose money on inflation.
But your production stopped.
Again, there is a golden mean.
There should not be too much money in the account,
but there should be exactly as much as is needed
to cover the current needs.
So that you do not have daily problems
in your business.
What are the needs that need to be covered?
Are all the needs that the enterprise has
to be covered with money?
No, only the primary needs,
which cannot be covered even tomorrow.
The needs that are more important than their repayment.
These needs should be covered with money.
And this money should be in the account.
If there is more money in the account,
it means that they are not being used effectively.
They are being lost.
Even if there was no inflation,
we could also talk about the ineffective use of money.
The money is being used in other forms of assets,
which bring additional income.
We should pay attention to this.
At least the minimum deposit in the bank.
There is a deposit in the bank, there is additional income.
It's just that the money in the account
does not bring any additional income to the enterprise.
The money in the account is the minimum sacrifice
that the enterprise has to make
in order to function properly.
To determine the minimum amount of money
that should be in the account,
we will use the formula presented on the slide.
The minimum amount of assets
for the enterprise is determined
as the ratio of the estimated amount of payment
for the current economic operations
in the coming period according to the plan of income and expenses,
and the turnover of cash assets in the following period.
Pay attention to the numerator.
The estimated amount of payment.
For example, this year we plan
to need this amount of money.
And in the denominator,
the turnover of cash assets in the same period in the past.
That is, per year,
how many times cash assets
of this enterprise are turned around.
By dividing one into another,
we get the amount of money we need in the account.
The fact is that the assets that we have in the enterprise
are constantly turning around.
Remember, liquidity of assets, their ability to turn into cash.
So, the assets are constantly turning around,
from material form to cash form,
and the amount of money we need
should remain the same all the time,
but not more than the amount required for the current needs.
And the current needs are determined
in terms of income and expenses.
The important thing is that the plan is realistic,
that the amounts that must be paid
in the current period,
and that cannot wait until
additional money is turned into cash,
will be accumulated in order to pay.
This is the peculiarity of determining
the minimum amount of money.
In conclusion, we will consider an example
with which we calculate the amount of money
that should be in the account of the enterprise.
For example,
according to the plan of income and expenses,
the turnover of the enterprise per year
is estimated at 500 million rubles.
The turnover of cash assets is 25 times per year.
Hence, the question is,
what is the amount of money that should be in the account?
According to the formula we have discussed above,
we divide the total amount of money
that should be in the enterprise
by the number of turns that occur.
And we get that the minimum amount of money
that should be in the account
is 2 million rubles.
What does it mean?
It means that the enterprise should make sure
that at the beginning of each day
the enterprise has such amount of money.
It can be used, used actively,
and it should be used actively.
Thus, within the turnover,
this amount should be in the enterprise's account.
And the enterprise works with it,
actively uses it,
and it is renewed 25 times a year,
that is, it is restored about 2 times a month.
And again, it is spent 15 days.
And at the end of the cycle,
it should be restored and spent again.
Thus, we have determined the minimum amount of money
that should be in the enterprise
and used to fulfill its current payments.
Today's lecture was fully devoted to the work
of the enterprise's own assets,
and the enterprise's own turnover assets.
We have shown that these own turnover assets
play a very important, very significant role
in the enterprise's financial life.
They cannot be left to their own devices.
Their active use allows to significantly improve
the financial situation of the enterprise.
And vice versa, if we let it go to the drain,
the financial situation of the enterprise will go down to zero,
up to bankruptcy.
The enterprise's financial service should actively work
with these money, track them, manage both the debitor's debt
and the balance of the money on the account.
By tracking these three processes and managing them,
the enterprise will always be in excellent financial shape.
That is what I wish to all of you who are listening to this lecture.
All the best to you. See you next time.